README.md, before:

# Zero to mvp project.

## How to run

To run the project

1. you need node install (suggested node version 18.17.#)
2. run `npm i`
3. run `npm run start`
4. navigate to the available local server and from there to any level you wish.

## How I worked

### Level -1

1. spent some time on understanding the project before starting working on it
   - carefully checked everything in it
   - created a mental model in my mind that could lead to a solution
   - inform the team about my first estimate time
2. created the project and initialized git
3. created a README file
4. npm:
   - tool used [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm)
   - npm version used: 9.6.7
   - node version used: v18.17.0, `lts/hydrogen`
   - created [package.json](./package.json) with `npm init`
   - package installed [http-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/http-server) to server html static files with `npm i -D http-server`
   - created script in [package.json](./package.json) and a "How to run" in this README file.
5. downloaded resources for the project and added to the project ([level_1.html](./level_1.html), [level_2.html](./level_2.html), [level_3.html](./level_3.html))
6. studied [Web Speech API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Speech_API/Using_the_Web_Speech_API#speech_synthesis)
7. created a homepage [homepage](./index.html) file, added a favicon & created [synthesys.js](./synthesis.js) file
8. created a TODO list
9. created a .gitignore file to ignore node_modules
10. initial commited my work, to start working on level zero (`git add .` & `git commit`)

### Level 0

1. before implementing something more complex, updated the level_0.html so that it has ids and buttons
2. using those ids and buttons used "speechSynthesis" API. I kept it simple, just to make sure everything works as expected with this API.
3. added functionallities such as "pause, resume, cancel"
4. added some logs on events such as "onstart, onend, onpause, onerror".
5. added state to track the state.
6. to keep code readable, cleaned up the code a bit.
7. issue found on chrome:
   - "onwordboundary, onpause, onresume" don't work as they should.
   - pause boolean stays false even after pause function is called.
   - So for the state we won't rely on them. We can rey on the button click event for pause / resume.
8. an other issue was found. sometimes cancel button needs to be pressed, even if nothing is currently playing. So before playing anything new, it would be a good idea to preactively cancel. In future steps I will keep in mind that onerror will fire on cancel as well.
9. the widget state should be based on click events.
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is idle
     1. call cancel method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object. In case something is already playing it should stop. This is done to avoid a bug which sometimes requires to call the cancel method before the player is available again.
     2. handle the expected triggered error for this cancel method wasn't needed. TODO: Find why
     3. update the text property from the `SpeechSynthesisUtterance` object
     4. call speak method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     5. update buttons content & data-state to "playing"
     6. save button element in a elementPlaying variable.
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is playing
     1. call pause method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     2. update buttons content & data-state to "paused"
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is "paused"
     1. call resume method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     2. update buttons content & data-state to "playing"
   - on events onerror, onend,
     1. if elementPlaying isn't null then update the data-state from it to idle.
     2. save null in a elementPlaying variable.
   - on onstart if property pending from the `SpeechSynthesisUtterance` object is true throw an error for now. This happens probably because something else currently is using the speech API in the website. TODO: handle this case.
10. removed buttons from html and with javascript rendered the buttons and targeted the elements using the siblings.
11. a `renderPlayer` function with a config object as parameter is created. Default configurations added.

### Level 0 - styling

1. used tool [icomoon](https://icomoon.io/) to create and download pause & play svg.
2. for each button, created a pause and a play svg element
3. removed the contents of each button and then appended the svg as a child. Did the same thing when the button must change svg icon because of the state of the button. Always used the same svgs to avoid the constant creation of elements with each state change.
4. to make the buttons easily found with CSS a class `synthesis_player_btn` was added
5. for now created some styles and imported them for our buttons.
6. for the position of the button, calculations were needed with the help of a temporary off-screen element.

### Level 1

1. Updated the way it looks for an element to a recursive one.
2. key point was that an array of strings for speeches was created. The reason for this is that we didn't want the speeches to be too long since the API can't handle it. We created chunks
3. on page refresh speech didn't stop so when the page is loaded, we cancel any ongoing speeches
4. for the buttons position space from the left side of the screen was forgotten to be added to the calculations.
5. For the speech texts removed any unwanted spaces.
6. we made sure that headings, list items & paragraphs always have punctation.
7. links and buttons are announced as well.

### Level 2

1. Reposition buttons after everything is loaded
2. Fixed position, z-index, and some css properties
3. Fixed a bug that occured because previously I was using do while and changed to a Array build-in forEach function.
4. Headings is possible to contain elements and I had forgotten to update the way I was getting the text for elements as well. Fixed.

## TODO list

- check and update [package.json](./package.json)
- clean up code

Commit message:

updated readme & added some articles related to people with disabilities

README.md, after:

# Zero to mvp project.

## How to run

To run the project

1. you need node install (suggested node version 18.17.#)
2. run `npm i`
3. run `npm run start`
4. navigate to the available local server and from there to any level you wish.

## How I worked

### Level -1

1. spent some time on understanding the project before starting working on it
   - carefully checked everything in it
   - created a mental model in my mind that could lead to a solution
   - inform the team about my first estimate time
2. created the project and initialized git
3. created a README file
4. npm:
   - tool used [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm)
   - npm version used: 9.6.7
   - node version used: v18.17.0, `lts/hydrogen`
   - created [package.json](./package.json) with `npm init`
   - package installed [http-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/http-server) to server html static files with `npm i -D http-server`
   - created script in [package.json](./package.json) and a "How to run" in this README file.
5. downloaded resources for the project and added to the project ([level_1.html](./level_1.html), [level_2.html](./level_2.html), [level_3.html](./level_3.html))
6. studied [Web Speech API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Speech_API/Using_the_Web_Speech_API#speech_synthesis)
7. created a homepage [homepage](./index.html) file, added a favicon & created [synthesys.js](./synthesis.js) file
8. created a TODO list
9. created a .gitignore file to ignore node_modules
10. initial commited my work, to start working on level zero (`git add .` & `git commit`)

### Level 0

1. before implementing something more complex, updated the level_0.html so that it has ids and buttons
2. using those ids and buttons used "speechSynthesis" API. I kept it simple, just to make sure everything works as expected with this API.
3. added functionallities such as "pause, resume, cancel"
4. added some logs on events such as "onstart, onend, onpause, onerror".
5. added state to track the state.
6. to keep code readable, cleaned up the code a bit.
7. issue found on chrome:
   - "onwordboundary, onpause, onresume" don't work as they should.
   - pause boolean stays false even after pause function is called.
   - So for the state we won't rely on them. We can rey on the button click event for pause / resume.
8. an other issue was found. sometimes cancel button needs to be pressed, even if nothing is currently playing. So before playing anything new, it would be a good idea to preactively cancel. In future steps I will keep in mind that onerror will fire on cancel as well.
9. the widget state should be based on click events.
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is idle
     1. call cancel method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object. In case something is already playing it should stop. This is done to avoid a bug which sometimes requires to call the cancel method before the player is available again.
     2. handle the expected triggered error for this cancel method wasn't needed. TODO: Find why
     3. update the text property from the `SpeechSynthesisUtterance` object
     4. call speak method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     5. update buttons content & data-state to "playing"
     6. save button element in a elementPlaying variable.
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is playing
     1. call pause method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     2. update buttons content & data-state to "paused"
   - clicked while in data-state of the button is "paused"
     1. call resume method from the `SpeechSynthesis` object.
     2. update buttons content & data-state to "playing"
   - on events onerror, onend,
     1. if elementPlaying isn't null then update the data-state from it to idle.
     2. save null in a elementPlaying variable.
   - on onstart if property pending from the `SpeechSynthesisUtterance` object is true throw an error for now. This happens probably because something else currently is using the speech API in the website. TODO: handle this case.
10. removed buttons from html and with javascript rendered the buttons and targeted the elements using the siblings.
11. a `renderPlayer` function with a config object as parameter is created. Default configurations added.

### Level 0 - styling

1. used tool [icomoon](https://icomoon.io/) to create and download pause & play svg.
2. for each button, created a pause and a play svg element
3. removed the contents of each button and then appended the svg as a child. Did the same thing when the button must change svg icon because of the state of the button. Always used the same svgs to avoid the constant creation of elements with each state change.
4. to make the buttons easily found with CSS a class `synthesis_player_btn` was added
5. for now created some styles and imported them for our buttons.
6. for the position of the button, calculations were needed with the help of a temporary off-screen element.

### Level 1

1. Updated the way it looks for an element to a recursive one.
2. key point was that an array of strings for speeches was created. The reason for this is that we didn't want the speeches to be too long since the API can't handle it. We created chunks
3. on page refresh speech didn't stop so when the page is loaded, we cancel any ongoing speeches
4. for the buttons position space from the left side of the screen was forgotten to be added to the calculations.
5. For the speech texts removed any unwanted spaces.
6. we made sure that headings, list items & paragraphs always have punctation.
7. links and buttons are announced as well.

### Level 2

1. Reposition buttons after everything is loaded
2. Fixed position, z-index, and some css properties
3. Fixed a bug that occured because previously I was using do while and changed to a Array build-in forEach function.
4. Headings is possible to contain elements and I had forgotten to update the way I was getting the text for elements as well. Fixed.
5. Moved code into functions to improve readability and increase reusability
6. Added custom logger, and logs for everything we may care about. The logger can be muted with a configuration change.
7. In home page added some articles related to people with disabilities.

## TODO list

- check and update [package.json](./package.json)
- add CSS for home page
- trace page changes to update the speeches accordingly.
- add Speech recognition API and make it possible to start playing speeches based on what the user said.
- add configuartion button & update Speech recognition API to have acces to configurations as well.
